the Pacific Ocean. The River before us [was] wholly
unknown to us, and all information only a day's journey of
Rapids direct before us : by Observations I found the Latitude
of these, the Ilthkoyape Falls to be 48°. 38'. 7" N
Longitude 117°. 48'. 49" west, and the Variation 20 degrees
East rhe names of my men were Michel Bourdeaux, Pierre
Pareil, Joseph Cote, Michel Boulard, Francois Gregoire
;
with Charles and Ignace, two good Iroquois Indians, and two
Simpoil natives for Interpreters. We placed the Horses in
care of the Chief of the Village.
After praying the Almighty to protect and prosper us on 
our voyage to the Ocean, early on the third of July we embarked
and descended the River for near seventy miles, and
in the evening came to the Village of the Simpoil Indians.
In the above distance we had several strong Rapids which
required all our skill and activity, at one of which we had to
carry everything for near three fourths of a mile, the water
is high in the River, the current very strong with many
small whirlpools and eddies, but not dangerous. At fifty six
miles we passed the junction of the Spokane River, which
comes from the southeastward by a long series of unnavigable
Falls; the whole of this day the country has a pleasing
appearance, in places thinly wooded, but the greater part
meadows of short grass, very fine for sheep. The grounds
high and dry; above and below the Spokane River the banks
were often of perpendicular Rock of trap and basalt of a
black gray color, in places reddish, these banks had a curious
appearance to the height of about three hundred and fifty
feet, they retired from the River by a perpendicular step of
twenty to thirty feet, then a level table of ten to twenty
feet, from which rose another steep step, and level table to
the top of the bank. The width of the River may be estimated
at about
for the Chiefs of the Village to come and smoke, they
came, and the Men followed in single file, and all sat down
round the tent; the Chief made a short speech, saying he
was glad to see us, and then made a present of two half dried
Salmon, and about half a bushel of Roots of two kinds, the
one called Kamass a white root, of a slight bitter taste which
becomes a favorite, and is agreeable to the stomach; the
other is a kind of small onion, which is dug out of the ground
near the surface in a soft rich soil of loam, then washed and
baked in a smothered heat, when from white, they become a
rich dark brown and very sweet, they are nourishing, but
eaten too freely with moss bread, are apt to loosen the bowels,
and these two served for the rough bread and cheese of the
country. I have already remarked that this bread is made
from the long black moss, like hair that grows on the red
Fir Trees. Four pipes were now lighted and the smoking
enjoyed as a feast. The Chief made a long speech in a loud
singing voice, and each sentence responded to by the
others by Oy Oy : the Speech being ended and interpreted
to us, was thanks for our arrival, and hoping we would bring
to them Guns, Ammunition, Axes, Knives, Awls, and not to
forget Steels and Flints with many other articles, they were
able and willing to hunt, and would be able to pay for everything
they wanted, but at present they had only their hands
to procure food and clothing, and much more to the same
purpose, all too true. I then explained to them my object
to know how this River was to the sea, and if good, very
large Canoes with Goods of all kinds would arrive, by which
they would be supplied with Clothing and all they wanted
if they were industrious hunters. The two Simpoil Indians
collected; at the end of every three, or four, sentences, they
stopped and the Chief repeated the same aloud, so that all
could hear, and he was answered by Oy Oy. We noticed
that the News, whether good or bad, was pronounced in the
same tone of voice. Smoking for the present being over,
permission was asked for the Women to come and see us,
which being accorded they soon came with their children,
and made us a present of Roots and Berries; and sat down
around the Aien. Smoking commenced for a short time,
each Man took three hearty whiffs at the calumets passed,
but the Women were allowed only one whiff which they made
a long whiff.
The Chief now proposed they should all dance, to this
we assented; the Men formed two slightly curved lines with
the women close behind them; they had no instruments
and the only music was the song of a man painted Red and
Black, his hair stuck full of Feathers. His voice was strong
and good, but had few notes; during the song which lasted
about eight minutes, the dancers moved very slowly forward
with an easy motion, and without changing their position
danced back to the place they had left. At the end of the
song each person sat down in the place where the song left
them : the Chief made a speech of about two minutes; the
Song commenced and the dance, and in this manner continued
for about an hour when they ended and they retired to their
Lodges, and left us to our repose, which we much wanted :
The next day to acquire a knowledge of the country, I
remained until near Noon; the information was, the country
around them was much the same as that we had passed, to
the foot of the Hills; whither all the Deer had gone for
green grass and
be able to supply their wants; for at present two thirds of
their food is roots and berries, the few Salmon they get is
from a Wier across a Brook of fifteen yards wide, they are
small and poor, they did not know the use of the Net or
Seine. Of their Religion I had no time to learn much. They
seemed to acknowledge a Great Spirit who dwelled in the
clouds to be the master of everything, and when they died
their Souls went to him; the Sun, Moon and Stars were all
divinities, but the Sun above all; and that he made the
Lightning, Thunder and Rain. Their worship was in dancing,
and the last dance they gave me was for a safe voyage and
return to them.
At noon we left this poor but friendly people, and proceeded
down the River for six hours, the first four hours the
country was bold high grassy hills, which at length came on
the River in steep banks, with isolated rocks, and steep cliffs
all having a ruinous appearance, the ravines were many, steep,
narrow and rocky, the descent of the Rains had not left a
grain of earth, these cliffs contracted the width of the River,
the waves ran high with many whirlpools and eddies, in
one place the Steersman who was standing to guide the
Canoe lost his balance and fell out of the Canoe, but we
recovered him, we carried along part of a dangerous rapid
;
at 6 PM we tried to find a place to pitch our cotton tents, but
after an hour's search, we had to sit on the rocks and leave the
Canoe in the water. To stem this current is impossible,
and although the River is very high, yet some three years
past, by the Trees lodged among the Rocks, the water must
have been twelve
two for present use; and then embarked, in a short distance
we came to a heavy Rapid, the high waves of which obliged
us to put ashore, and carry everything full two miles; while
we were doing this a Chief with about sixty men, their women
and Children came to, and helped, us over the Carrying
Place. This being done, the Chief for himself and his people
made a present of five Horses, five good Salmon well roasted,
a bushel of arrow wood berries which are sweet, wholesome
and nourishing; about two bushels of various roots, some of
which I had not seen before, and the dried meat of four
small, very fat, animals, which I took to be Marmots;
 the
two latter with the five Horses I requested the Chief to take
in charge until we returned; for what we kept I paid three
feet of tobacco; fourteen plain and stone rings, eighteen
hawks bells, six feet of a string of blue beads, nine feet of
gartering, four papers of vermillion, four awls and six buttons,
which they thankfully accepted; such is the barter of these
countries with the Natives; heavy rain obliged us to pass
the day here.
This tribe is called Inspaelis, as they procure the Salmon
from the River, and not from a Weir on a Brook, the Salmon
are larger and in good condition, and from their clothing the
Deer are more plentifull than with the Simpoils, they are a
finer people, several of the Men were six feet in height; the
face rather oval, the eyes black, the nose straight and
prominent, the cheek bones moderate, teeth and mouth good,
the chin round, on the whole their appearance is manly,
mild, open and friendly. The men were ornamented with a
few shells, the women more profusely, in their ears, round
the neck, and hanging to their girdles; the tint of the skin
was not so dark as that of a Spaniard, some of the Women
daubed their faces with red ochre. Their Language
by whom I learned they have sufficient Deer in winter for
their support and clothing if they were better armed; they
have good blankets made of Bear, of Musk Rat, or the black
tailed Antelope, which are cut into narrow stripes, and neatly
interwoven. Each blanket was of one of these animals, and
not mixed.
They described their country as high, dry and hilly, with
short grass, the rock showing itself in many places, with but
few trees, and those of Fir, stunted and scattered; such a
country appears fit for only sheep, deer, and horses; but has
many Brooks of clear water : their manner of hunting is the
same as alredy described.
After smoking some time, they prepared to give us a
Dance, that we might have a safe voyage to the sea and in
like manner return to them. The Chief made a short prayer,
after which the dance commenced of the Men and Women,
each separate, to the music of their singing, which was pleasingly
plaintive, their voices full and clear and not too loud;
each line of Men and Women had a clear space of three or
four feet, within which they danced; at first the step was
slow, and the singing the same, but both gradually increased,
the step of the dance very quick as if pursuing, or being
pursued. This lasted for about eight minutes, when a pause
of two minutes took place; a prayer was made, and the dance
and singing repeated twice : the whole was strictly a religious
ceremony, every face was grave and serious, almost to
sadness; the prayers of the Chief was accompanied with
holding up his hands to heaven, and so far as I have seen the
people on the west side of the Mountains, their Religion
appears simple an
Redeemer of Mankind. They went to their Lodges, and sent
us a Salmon for which I paid six inches of tobacco. The
rapid of this carrying place is in several ridges, rushing down
a descent of full thirty feet; and the Salmon ascended to
these.
July 6th. A rainy morning; early several Men with a few
Women came and smoked a while, the Women had bracelets
of Shells and fillets of the same round the head. At 6i am
we embarked and in less than four hours came to a Tribe
and Village called Smeathhowe; as usual we put ashore, and
I sent the Simpoils to invite them to come and smoke with
us. They found them consulting what they should make a
present of, for the stranger must have a present made to
him or them. My reason for putting ashore and smoking
with the Natives, is to make friends with them, against my
return, for in descending the current of a large River, we
might pass on without much attention to them; but in
returning against the current, our progress will be slow and
close along the shore, and consequently very much in their
power; whereas staying a few hours, and smoking with them,
while explaining to them the object of my voyage makes
them friendly to us. The Men, Women and Children now
came dancing, and singing a mild, plaintive
Children to sit near the Men; the pipes were lighted,
and they all smoked with avidity the men taking from three
to six whiffs, some swallowing the smoke, but the Women
were allowed only one whiff. They now gave us three well
roasted Salmon, and half a bushel of Arrow Wood Berries,

very acceptable to us, for which I paid them. I learned
that from the time of the arrival of the Salmon, all the fish
that are taken for a certain time must be roasted, not boiled;
the Chiefs then assemble, and after some ceremonies, the
Salmon are allowed to be boiled, or cooked for the rest of
the season, as the people choose. The appearance of this
tribe is the same as the last, except the Women being more
profusely ornated with shells : their knowledge of the River
extended no farther than to the next village, where we would
learn the state of the River beyond them. At Noon we left
them and soon came to a bold Rapid of two miles in length,
the waves being too high for our Canoe we had to carry,
the Chief and four young men came with horses and helped
us to the foot of the Rapid for which I gave them eight inches
of Tobacco, which was thankfully accepted; this carrying
place took us to zi pm. We then descended a strong current
for full three and a half hours, and camped on the left for
the first time, the right being steep rocks. 2 The country and
banks of the river high, bold hills, very rude; with steep
cliffs; we could have passed hours in viewing the wild scenery,
but these romantic
Mountain Sheep looking down on us, which we longed to
eat, but [he] could not be approached. We had to kill two
Rattle Snakes that would not get out of our way.
July 7th. Having descended ten miles, we saw several
Men on horseback proceeding to the westward, two of them
rode to the River side, we went to, and smoked with them,
and each of us held on our ways. I learned that they were
sent from a Village to apprise them of our coming. Having
continued for four miles, we came to two long Lodges of the
same structure as those we have passed, sufficiently well
covered with rush matts; one of these Lodges was two
hundred and forty feet in length; the other sixty feet in
length; each by thirty feet in breadth; all these measurements
are by stepping the lengths at three feet each step.
By their account the name of this tribe is Sinkowarsin;
 they
are about one hundred and twenty families, and from the
Women and Children must be about eight hundred Souls :
the Language is still a dialect of the Saleesh, but my Simpoil
Interpreters find several words they did not understand
;
when we passed, and put ashore below them, they were all
dancing in their Lodges, to the sound of their songs, for
hitherto we have not seen a musical instrument even of the
most rude kind along this River. We sent to them to come
and smoke, five steady looking men came, sat down near us
and smoked, but although many of the Natives we had
passed viewed us with some suspicion, as at a loss what to
make of us, these Men much more so, nor could their countenances
features, the children well formed and playful, and respect
with kind attention to each other pervaded the whole; tho'
at present poor in provisions, they were all in good health,
and except the infirmities of old age, we have not seen a
sick person, partly from using much vegetable food, and
partly from a fine dry temperate climate.
They describe their country to the southward to be being
high dry and barren, without animals; to the northward the
lands are good with Antelopes, Mountain Sheep (Big Horn) 
and Goats,2 of which their clothing is made, and of the fine
long wool of the latter they make good rude blankets. They
had also a few Bison Robes which they must have traded
from other Tribes; all these things allowed them to be
better clothed than any tribe we had yet seen. We saw no
weapons of war with them, and like all the other Tribes
they may be said to be unarmed : and like them also they
were all as cleanly as people can be without the use of Soap,
an article not half so much valued in civilized life as it ought
to be. What would become of the Belle and the Beau without
it. And also all linen, and cotton; I have often known
the want of it, and had to use fine blue clay as a substitute.
As we were about to leave this people with their prayers
for our safety, a fine looking man came to us and requested
a passage in our Canoe for himself and Wife, to a tribe below
us of which he was a Chief. He remarked to us that the
Simpoil Indians could not interpret for us much farther down
the River, as the Natives spoke a different language, which
both himself and his Wife well understood, and that he
would then become our Interpreter, glad of the offer we gave
them a passage with their little baggage. After descending
people to whom we are utterly unknown, a trifling accident
might produce serious effects. Here was a place for a winter
campment, it was of the form of a long Lodge, the earth a
dry light soil excavated to the depth of one foot, clean and
level, the floor of earth, over which the Lodge is erected.
Having descended the current for twenty one miles we
camped for the night. To this distance the Banks of the
River have become much lower, but all the bays opposite
the Points of the River have steep banks of trap rock, about
forty to fifty feet, the points are of fine meadow, and when
the water subsides to it's usual level must be extensive : the
current more moderate, yet has many whirlpools. On the
whole this day the River and country has a more pleasing
appearance than usual, but without woods, except a few
scattered dwarf red Fir.
July 8th. Having proceeded seven miles we came to a
village of Sixty Two families, the rapid current drove us half
a mile below the village before we could land; the Chief, a
middle aged, manly looking man on Horseback now rode
down to examine us, he appeared very much agitated, the
foam coming out of his mouth; wheeling his horse backwards
and forwards, and calling aloud, who are you, what
are you. Our custom was to leave one, or two, men in the
Canoe to keep it afloat, the rest of us drew up near the shore,
about three feet from each other all well armed, myself in
the front apparently unarmed; this Chief sometimes appeared
to make a dash
composed, my native interpreter, who stood with us now
spoke to him in a manly manner telHng him who we were,
and what we came for, to which he listened with attention,
then called out oy, oy. He was now joined by a well made,
short, stout old man, his hair quite white, he was on foot
and came with a message. We invited him to come with his
people and smoke, upon which he set off on a gallop, the old
man on foot keeping near him. Having repeated to the people
what we had said and to come forward and smoke, he returned
at the same pace, the old man keeping close to him.
To our admiration, he was naked and barefooted, and we could
not help saying to each other, which of us at his age will be
equally active. The Man came and smoking commenced, a
present of four Salmon, and two of a small species, with
berries were made, of the latter we took only part. By the
interpreter I told them what I had to say, the Chief repeated
the words in a loud voice, which was repeated by a man in
a louder voice. The women now came forwards, singing
and dancing which they continued all the time the men were
smoking : The Men were well formed, but not handsome,
tho' their features were regular, they were poorly clothed;
and the women equally so, two of them were naked, but not
abashed; they all had shells in their nostrils some had fillets
round the head and bracelets of shells round the wrists, or
arms, but want of clothing made them appear to disadvantage.
These people are altogether distinct from those we
have seen, and are of the Shawpatin, or as it is sometimes
pronounced, Sararpatin nation, of which there are several
tribes, and speak a Language peculiar to themselves, it
appeared soft, with many vowels, and easy of pronunciation
;
it is the native tongue of the Interpreter. These people, as
well as those of the last Village, are making use of the Seine
Net, which is well made from wild Hemp, which grows on
the rich low grounds. The net appeared about full
trimmed and worked in the manner we use it, which gave
them a supply for the day, and a few to dry. But fish
however plenty can never compensate the want of Deer,
Sheep, and Goats for clothing, and frequently a change of
food.
We left these people and proceeded forty miles to 5 pm
when seeing a large camp before us we put ashore; four
Horsemen came to us, and having smoked I told them to
invite the Men to come and smoke, they came and sat down
in an orderly manner, the pipes went round, and the often
repeated speech was made of my going to the Sea, to procure
all the Articles they were so much in want of, and return to
them, and for which they must be industrious hunters in the
winter season, and procure furrs for payment; all this was
readily promised, they said somewhere near their campment
would be a good place for us to make a Lodge and trade
with them, as the large River close below them led to a fine
country and skirted the distant Mountains we saw; that they
had a very mild winter, the depth of Snow they showed was
about eight inches, they had sometimes more but [it] soon
melted away. They represented to us, that they had plenty
of Deer, two of the species very small, with small Trout and
other Fish for the winter, with dried Salmon; all the above
in long detail was repeated by three Chiefs, after each other,
in a loud voice : they made us a present of four Salmon, for
the first time fat,
boiled, they had neither roots nor berries; while the Salmon
season continues they live wholly by the Seine Net.
The name of this Tribe is Skaemena, they are Shawpatins,
and number one hundred and fifty families, and are not less
than about one thousand souls. They were all tolerably well
dressed, many of the women had not a shell in their nostril;
and less ornamented than those we have seen. They were
healthy, and as clean as people can be without Soap. The Men
were generally above the middle size, rather tall, well made
for activity, their features good, mild yet manly; many of the
women would pass for handsome if better dressed, they were
decent, modest and well behaved. And both sexes kind and
attentive to each other, and to their children, most of the
latter were poorly clothed, or naked. After giving a dance
for a safe voyage, at 9 pm