Various duties for the Voyage before us, got
the Canoe ready and sent off to the Kullyspel Lake
m. with Furrs and Provisions, the weather variable, but
very mild. April 9. 5 am +38 2 pm +52 9 pm +42
small Rain. April 18. 5 am +38 Clear 2 pm +71 hazy.
9 PM +38 calm. Getting all ready to set off the morrow
19. We left the House to proceed on our Voyage to exchange
the Furrs for Goods c. The 25 part of this day
was passed in observations for Latitude Longitude and Variation
of the Compass, of no use to the general reader. The
same on the 26, when we had the good fortune to kill one
Crane, thirteen Geese and one Duck. April 27 proceeded
on discovery down the Spokane River till 2.25 pm, when
finding the River bounded by high craigs, of contracted
space, with strong rushes of current, small Falls, and Whirlpools,
we put ashore to examine the country below us. Of
late a great change had taken place, the remains of the heavysnows
of Winter, which is very deep in these countries, is
everywhere on the ground giving everything a wintry appearance
; we landed on the left side which appeared the best,
went up a high steep bank of rocks and earth, and then
through small, close woods, for one mile in deep snow, which
sometimes bore us up, but often we sunk in it to our middle;
we were obliged to haul ourselves out by the branches of the
Trees. Having crossed the Carrying Place, we had a steep
bank to go down from the top I surveyed the country
before me, with the assistance of the Indian a bold range
of high Mountains covered with snow bounded the left side
of the River, and also formed it's banks in rude craigs the
right side was of high steep Hills of rock, and ranged away
to a great distance. My Guide who has been here pointed
out the country about three miles below us was a Fall
that fell over steep Rocks, the height of a large tree say
80 to 100 feet but could not be approached in this season,
the Snow was too deep in the Summer they left the Canoes
a short distance above the Fall, and by hands and feet got
along the steep Rocks to the Fall, beyond which no Indian
had ever gone, except a very few to gather red ochre, which
is oftains. The road he described as highly dangerous, passable
only to light, active, men, and they are obliged frequently
to go on hands and knees, and thus get up the high steep
rocks which he assured us continued for two and a half
days march beyond the great Fall when they came on the
Columbia River. The Spokane River for this distance is a
terrible Cataract, bounded on each side by high Craigs, and
unnavigable those who voyage this way make a long carrying
place to a small River which runs nearly paralel to the
Columbia, and falls into it below the Cataract this River
he said to be too shoal for us. Although so near the Great
Falls, he assured us, it would take a whole day to arrive
there, including the Carrying Place we were on this I
readily believed, as the Carrying Place alone would require
four hours of active men. This range of rude, high, rocky
Hills gave me a view of the structure of the country which I
had not had before. I never to myself, could account for the
small quantity of Snow at the west foot of the Mountains along
the whole of the Kootanae and Saleesh countries for the length
of about 400 miles these high Hills intercepted all the
heavy vapours from the Pacific Ocean, and the great valley
between them and the west foot of the mountains have only
the light vapours which pass above these Hills the breadth
of this fine valley is irregular, and may be estimated at one
hundred miles the depth of snow on these Hills in Winter
must be very great when we found so much, so late in the
season, after such heavy thaws. I now perceived the Columbia
River was in a deep valley at the north end of these rude
Hills, and it's west side the high rolling lands of Amount
and considering all the information I had collected from
various Indians, I concluded that we must abandon all
thoughts of a passage this way, and return by our old Road,
till some future opportunity shall point out a more eligible
road, which I much doubt Near 5 pm began our return
and put up at pm. And I observed for Latitude. Killed
one Swan, one Crane, two Geese and found sixteen goose
eggs in different nests. The Crane was fat. In many places
there is much snow along the beach, and it is deep in the
woods. Such is the nature of this region.
May 1st. Came to my Men who are finishing a Canoe,
and told them to look for more Birch Rind and white Cedar
to make another Canoe we continued our journey to pm,
the River always from three to five hundred yards wide.
Our hunt to-day was one Antelope, three Geese and one
Duck. The great depth of snow on this end of the Road,
and the weak state of the Horses, put me in mind of a Rivulet
which we had to cross on the Carrying Place to McGiUivray's
River and by proceeding up it, shorten the distance for the
Horses, and avoid the worst part of the deep snow we found
the sortie of the Rivulet, and on the 3rd by proceeding up
it we came to the Road On the 16th with much suffering
and hard Labor we got all the Furrs to McGiUivray's River,
where our Canoes of last year were laid up and which we had
to repair, for which purpose all we could procure was nine
feet of second rate Birch Rind May. We got the
Canoes repaired, and in the afternoon with forty six packs
of Furrs, and eight bags of Pemmecan they went off for the
Rocky Mountain defiles. Mr Jas McMillan, one Man and
myselfHorses to the Saleesh Carrying Place to the Saleesh River;
and then returned for the rest of their cargoe of Furrs, with
which they arrived. On the 9th June, thank God, we arrived
safe at McGilivray's Carrying Place, which leads to the
scource of the Columbia River and crossed all the Horses,
they are in poor condition, the grass scant, and bruised
in the many rapids we have crossed to this place we now
go direct for the defiles of the Rocky A4ountains. When we
landed we saw the fresh tracks of Peeagan Scouts, they had
this morning broken the branch of an Aspin Tree, and peeled
the bark, on examining the tracks, we found they had gone
up the River to recross the Mountains. Had we been a few
hours sooner, we should have had to fight a battle, which,
thank God, is thus avoided.
June 16th. Early came to the Carrying Place of the
Mountains Our Hoard strongly built of Pine Logs, and
covered with Pine Bark, we found cut through by a
Wolverene, whom we killed he had eaten twenty five pounds
of Pemmican, half of a dressed leather Skin, three pairs of
Shoes, and cut to pieces seven large Saddles and broken the
Pine Bark covering to pieces this animal is everywhere a
devil for mischief. Left Mr McMillan and four Men in
charge of the Furrs, and to wait fresh Horses from the east
end of the Defile We were in hopes of seeing Men and
Horses here to cross the Furrs, but suppose the Snow is too
deep but necessity compels me to proceed to the east end
of the Defile for fresh Horses with seven M
left on the iS we crossed the Height of Land, and our
jaded Horses got free of the Snow Early on the 19''' came
to the Men in charge of the Horses, they were waiting for
the Snow to almost disappear. Giving them all the dried
Provisions I had, sent them off with all the fresh Horses to
Mr McMillan, who is in charge of the Furrs. We went to
where the large canoe was laid up, found it very little damaged,
repaired it, and with three Men, and Pembok a Chippeway
Indian an hour after Noon we embarked on the rapid,
sinuous, stream of the head of the great Saskatchewan River;
and put up at the lower end of the Kootanae Plains as we
are now in the land of the Bison we hope no more to be in
want of Provisions. Pembok went a hunting and killed a
Bison BuU of which he brought us about twenty pounds, bull
meat is not regarded, it is seldom fat, and always tough.
June 20. Early we gummed the Canoe, made a Seat
for the two men, Boisverd steered the Canoe, and two men
paddled, the Indian sat in the middle of the Canoe, and I
took the Bow, as the most experienced on rapid Rivers. The
melting of the Snow in the Mountains had increased the
current to a torrent, on every rock, snag, or root of a tree
the water was like a fall, the men paddled merely sufficient
to give the Canoe steerage way we were descending with
careless gaiety, when within four inches of the canoe, a large
sawyer of 18 inches diameter arose, which gave us a fright
that put an end to our cheerfulness, for a blow from such a
tree would have dashed the canoe to pieces. A Sawyer, for
want of a greek name is a large tree torn from the Banks by
the current, and floated down to some place too shoal to allow
the Root to pass, here it rests, but the tree itself is in the
current below it, it's buoyancy makes it float, but being fast
the current buries it, to a certain depth, from which the
elasticity and lightness of the wood causes it to rise like the
spring of a Bow again it is buried, and again rises, and thus
continues to
it's way, until the water lowers, and becomes too shoal. I
once saw a Bison Bull across a small Sawyer, it had come up
and taken him under the Belly, his weight kept it from much
play, he was swiming with all his might his fore legs on one
side, and his hind legs on the other, and the Sawyer dodging
him up and down gave us a hearty laugh had it been a
Deer, we might have relieved him, but the Bison is so savage,
that he is never pitied, get into what mischief he will. Our
hunt to-day, a Bison Bull, one Red Deer, and wounded a
Mountain Sheep, we camped at the foot of the high Craigs
of Limestone, to be free of an attack from the Peeagan
Indians.
deserted, it is situated on a high dry bank, as well built as
possible with Logs of wood, and now in ruins it is a strange
fact that of all pine log buildings they are in ruins a few
months after they cease to be inhabited, however dry the
ground and the climate.
We had now full five hundred miles to descend this noble
river Saskatchewan where it passes through the great Plains,
with woods only in places, the very country of the Bison,
the Red Deer and the Antelopes. As we descended many
herds of the Bison were crossing as the whim took them.
They swim well, though slowly, and however troublesome the
Flies, they never like the Deer shelter themselves under
water, but roll themselves on the ground to get rid of them:
It is remarked that all land Animals when killed in the water
do float and all aquatic, as the Beaver, Otter and Musk
Rat, do sink in the water when shot, and have to be laid
hold of as soon as possible, or they are lost At this season
the Bison Bulls are fatter than the Cows, we preferred them,
and when swiming they are shot in the head close under
the ear, one of them so shot to our surprise sunk like a stone
and we had to kill another thus we held on to where the
Forests close on the River, and the Bison is no longer seen,
nothing now to amuse us, but myriads of Musketoes and
Horse flies to vex us, and allow no rest night nor day.
This turbid River has formed immense alluvials of about
two hundred miles in width to the Cedar Lake, through
which it passes in several Channels this very rich soil is
much covered with Reeds and rushes, but where the lands
have graduallythis has taken place the Moose Deer have taken possession.
On the west side of these alluvials is Cumberland Lake, on
the east bank of which is situated Cumberland House in
N Longitude 102.13 West. This House
was the first inland trading post the Hudson's Bay Companymade,
remarkably well situated for the trade of fine Furrs:
it serves as the general Depot for all the dried Provisions made
of the meat and fat of the Bison under the name of Pemican,
a wholesome, well tasted nutritious food, upon which all
persons engaged in the Furr Trade mostly depend for their
subsistence during the open season it is made of the lean
and fleshy parts of the Bison dried, smoked, and pounded
fine in this state it is called Beat Meat the fat of the Bison
is of two quahties, called hard and soft the former is from
the inside of the animal, which when melted is called hard
fat properly grease the latter is made from the large flakes
of fat that He on each side the back bone, covering the ribs,
and which is readily separated, and when carefully melted
resembles Butter in softness and sweetness. Pimmecan is
made up in bags of ninety pounds weight, made of the parchment
hide of the Bison with the hair on the proportion of
the Pemmecan when best made for keeping is twenty pounds
of soft and the same of hard fat, slowly melted together, and
at a low warmth poured on fifty pounds of Beat Meat, well
mixed together, and closely packed in a bag of about thirty
inches in length, by near twenty inches in breadth, and
about four in thickness which makes them flat, the best shape
for stowage and carriage. On the great Plains there is a
shrub bearing a very sweet berry of a dark blue color, much
sought after, great quantities are dried by the Natives in
this state, these berries are as sweet as the best currants, and
as much as possible mixed to make Pemmecan the wood of
this shrub, or willow is hard, weighty and flexible, but
Arrow of the Indian, the native name is Mis-sars-cut to
which mee-nar is added for the berry we call it by the
native name, but the french who murder every foreign word
call the Berry, Poires, and Pim-me-carn Peemittegar. I
have dwelt on the above, as it the staple food of all
persons, and affords the most nourishment in the least space
and weight, even the gluttonous french Canadian that devours
eight pounds of fresh meat every day is contented with one
and a half pound p day it would be admirable provision
for the Army and Navy. It is at Cumberland House all the
Pimmecan, and dried provisions of all kinds procured from
the great Plains are brought down the Saskatchewan and
deposited here, and which forms the supply for the furr
Traders going to, and coming from, all the trading Posts;
By receiving the turbid waters of the Saskatchewan it has
remarkably fine Sturgeon, a fish that requires such water to
be in perfection.
The Cedar Lake is fast fiUing up with alluvial matter, but
has yet twenty eight miles of width, which we crossed. This
Lake takes it's name from the small Cedar Wood growing on
it's banks, and which is not found further north or eastward.
The shores of this Lake is of Limestone on both sides from
this Lake there is a descent of five miles of Rapids to Cross
Lake, which has a width of three miles, and a length of nine
miles in rapids and Falls, is the discharge into Lake Winepeg
Sea Lake the last two miles is a carrying place the whole
of this is Limestone, and forms it's eastern termination;
coasting sixty eight miles of the north end of this Lake, the
River again forms, but the whole of the country is now of
granitic formation, and continues such to the vicinity of
Hudson's BayFrom the Lake Winepeg it proceeds 107 miles
forming
twenty eight Falls, with 8183 yards of carrying everything
at these Falls and the banks of the River the descent of the
River in this last 177 miles is 1580 feet. From where it is
first navigable for a Canoe in the Mountains to it's entrance
into the Sea it's length is 1725 miles, and this River drains
an area of country of 426,529 square miles, the western parts
to the Mountains are very fine countries. This was formerly
my route from, and to, Hudson's Bay, but our course is along
the west side of this large Lake for 194 miles to the sortie of
the Winepeg River. The shores of all this distance is of
Limestone, and the interior country a fine soil. The area of
this Lake is full 14,600 Square Miles. Here is another Depot
of Provisions of the Pimmecan and other dried Provisions from
the Red, the Swan, and Dauphin Rivers which flow into
this Lake on it's west side. The Winepeg River has its
scources on the north side of the heights of Lake Superior,
small streams, which find and make. Lakes, and accumulate
water, some of considerable size, are the Rainy Lake and Lake
of the Woods. This range of country has a great descent,
the River as it proceeds from Lake to Lake has many Falls and
carrying places. We ascended the River Winepeg 130 miles,
carrying over it's 33 falls, 5691 with a descent of 314 feet
and a distance of 82 miles, to the Lake of the Woods over
which we went to the Rainy River, and up this fine River,
to near the Rainy Lake, where is an old established trading
Post and Depot of Merchandize and Provisions of Maize c.
and where, thank God, we arrived safely on the 22nd of July.
Although this whole distance is a granite formation, yet
the soil is a rich loam, tending to clay, and yields a good return
of Wheat and Barley, of cabbages c so far
a Lady Conjuress made her appearance. She was well
dressed of twenty five years of age, she had her Medicine
Bag, and bore in her hands a conjuring stick about feet in
length at the foot and three inches at the top,
by one inch in thickness, one side was painted black, with rude
carved figures of Birds Animals and Insects filled with vermillion
; the other side was painted red with carved figures
in black, she had set herself up for a prophetess, and gradually
had gained, by her shrewdness, some influence among the
Natives as a dreamer, and expounder of dreams, she recollected
me, before I did her, and gave me a naughty look of defiance,
as much as to say I am now out of your power. Some six
years before this she was living with one of my men as his wife,
but became so common that I had to send her to her relations
; as all the Indian men are married, a courtesan is
neglected by the men and hated by the Women. She had
turned Prophetess for a livelihood, and found fools enough
to support her there is scarce a character in civiHzed society
that has not something like it among these rude people