Provisions to keep us until we should come to where
the Bisons are; after which we lived by hunting them to
the upper end of the Plains; to where the River passes
through Forests to the Mountains. Here engaged two native
men to hunt for us, the Red Deer and Bisons of the Woods.
The manner of furnishing the Men with Provisions, was by
hunting these animals, and bringing their meat by Horses to
the Canoes a supply for full three days; when we appointed
a place to meet them with a fresh supply; thus the Canoes
proceeded to within twenty miles of the east foot of the
Mountains; we had given them a full supply for three days,
and M WilHam Henry, the two Indians and myself proceeded
to the foot of the Mountains, where we killed three Red
Deer, made a Stage and placed the meat on it in safety to
wait the Canoes. This was on the 13th October 18 10, and we
expected the Canoes to arrive late on the 16th or early on
the 1
7 at latest, but they did not make their appearance;
our oldest Hunter of about forty years of age as usual rose
very early in the morning and looking at the Stage of Meat,
said to me, I have had bad dreams, this meat will never be
eaten, he then saddled his Horse and rode off. Somewhat
alarmed at his ominous expression and the non arrival of the
canoes, I told Mr Henry and the Indian to proceed thro' the
Woods down along the River in search of the Canoes, and
see what detained them, with positive orders not to fire a
shot but in
seen a camp of Peeagans on the bank of the River, that a
short distance below the camp, they had descended the bank
to the River side, and found where the Canoes had been.
They had made a low rampart of Stones to defend themselves,
and there was blood on the stones; they went below this
and fired a shot in hopes of an answer from the Canoes, but
it was not returned: I told them they had acted very
foolishly, that the Peeagans would be on us very early in the
morning, and that we must start at the dawn of day, and
ride for our Hves; on this we acted the next morning, and
rode off, leaving the meat: the country we had to pass over
was an open forest, but we had to cross, or ride round so
many fallen trees that active Men on foot could easily keep
up with us; the Peeagans had very early arrived at the Stage
of meat and directly followed the tracks of the Horses, and
would in the evening have come up with us, but providentially
about one in afternoon snow came on which covered our
tracks and retarded them; about an hour after, as they
related, they came on three grizled Bears direct on the track
(they were smelling the tracks of the Horses) they were fully
perswaded that I had placed the Bears there to prevent any
further pursuit; nor could any arguments to the contrary
make them believe otherwise and this behef was a mercy to
us: we rode on through the Woods until it was nearly dark,
when we were obliged to stop; we remained quiet awaiting
our fortune, when finding all quiet, we made a small fire,
and passed the night with some anxiety; my situation precluded
sleep, cut off from my men, uncertain where to find
them, and equally so of the movements of the Indians, I was
at a loss what to do, or which way to proceed; morning came
and I had to determine what course to take, after being
much perplexed whether I should take to the defiles of the
Mountains and see if the Men and Horses were s
second day we found them about forty miles below the
Indians, at a trading Post lately deserted; here after much
consultations, we fully perceived we had no further hopes of
passing in safety by the defiles of the Saskatchewan River,
and that we must now change our route to the defiles of the
Athabasca River which would place us in safety, but would
be attended with great inconvenience, fatigue, suffering and
privation; but there was no alternative. We therefore
directed the Men to proceed through the woods to the
defiles of the Mountains and bring down the Horses to take
the Goods across the country to the Athabasca River, and on
the October they arrived with twenty four Horses and
we were now in all twenty four Men; having furnished
ourselves with leather Tents and dressed leather for shoes
;
we loaded our Horses in proportion to their strength from
180 to 240 pounds weight each Horse, and arranged the Men,
four to hunt and procure provisions, two Men to clear a path
thro' the woods, the other taking care of the Horses, and other
duties; with Thomas an Iroquois Indian as Guide; our
road lay over the high grounds within about thirty miles of
the Mountains; the Woods are mostly of a kind of Cypress,
of small clean growth, and not close. With occasional cutting
away of few trees we should have made several miles a day,
but the forests are so frequently burned and occasions so
many windfalls, that the Horses make very slow progress,
thus the dense forests are destroyed and meadows formed.
We went eight miles in six and a half hours, and put up,
without any supper. The country tolerable good with Pine
and Aspin Woods.
October 30th. The hunters, thank heaven, killed two
cow Bisons and a young grizled Bear. We went six miles and
camped, as we had to collect the meat, the ground was wet,
the Horses fatig
with two men passed the day examining the country which
they found passable, but no success in hunting.
November 2nd. A fine warm day. Having for near three
hours cleared a path through the woods, we went ten miles,
in this distance we crossed the Pembinaw River of forty yards
in width, but shoal; this name is a corruption of Neepinmenan
(Summer Berry). Observed for Latitude and Longitude.
The Horses in going thro' the wood often deranged
their loads, and as they came; the wet ground of to-day,
with burnt fallen wood fatigued the Horses, and we camped
early. And thus we continued with the usual occurrences
and mishaps to the 29th of November, when we came on the
Athabasca River; up which we ascended till the afternoon
of the 4th of December; here our Guide told me it was of
no use at this late season to think of going any further with
Horses, and part were sent to the Mountain House, but from
this place prepare ourselves with Snow Shoes and Sleds to
cross the Mountains: Accordingly the next day we began
to make Log Huts to secure the Goods, and Provisions, and
shelter ourselves from the cold and bad weather; the Thermometer
on our march had descended to -32 which is
64 degrees below the freezing point, and by means of this
intense cold, the marshes and morasses were frozen over
Our whole attention for the present was turned to hunting
and securing provisions; having now made Snow Shoes, and
Sleds, on the 30th day of December we commenced our
journey to cross the Mountains and proceeded up the Athabasca
River, sometimes on it's shoals and ice, and at times
through the woods of it's banks. The soil was sandy and a
Gale of Wind drifted it to lie on the low branched pines, of
wretched growth, for Snow does not lie on Sand Hills; On
the 31' December we proceeded but slowly and I had to
reduce the weight of the Loads of the Dogs to less than two
thirds, and make a Log Hoard to secure what we left. This,
the work of two hours the men took five hours to finish,
during which time they cooked twice a four gallon Kettle
full of Meat, which they devoured, although they had had a
hearty breakfast, in fact a french Canadian has the appetite
of a Wolf, and glories in it; each man requires eight pounds
of meat p day, or more; upon my reproaching some of them
with their gluttony, the reply I got was, What pleasure
have we in Life but eating." A French Canadian if left to
himself, and living on what his Master has, will rise very early
make a hearty meal, smoke his pipe, and lie down to sleep,
and he will do Httle else through the day: to enumerate
the large animals that had been killed, and I may say devoured
by my men
the same Men when with me on government
surveys, where the allowance was one pound of mess Pork
(the best) one and a half pound of good fresh Biscuit and
half a pound of pease, did not find it too much, and the
evening of each day left nothing. Thus ended the year.
1811. January 1st. The Thermometer -22. Our Hunters
were fortunate in killing two young Bulls, and a Mountain
Sheep; we marched all day to 4 pm when we camped,
placing the branches of the Pine under us, and a few small
branchy Trees to windward, this was all our protection from
the bitter cold,
January 2nd. Ther - 20. Collected the meat of the hunt
of yesterday, and staid all day roughly spHtting and drying
what we could to take with us, as of meat in this state,
the weight is much lessened but not the nourishment. I now
lessened the Dog Sleds to eight, the men had beaten two of
them to be useless; a Canadian never seems to be better
pleased than, when swearing at, and flogging his Dogs. It
is quite his amusement, careless of consequences.
Jany 3rd. Arrangements for the journey.
Jany 4th. As usual the Men early up cooking a plentiful
breakfast, they are stimulated to this by the sight of the
snowy Mountains before us, and are determined to put themselves
in a good condition for fasting, with which the passage
of the Mountains threaten them.
Jany 5th. Thermometer - 26 very cold. Having secured
the goods and provisions we could not take with us, by 11 am
set off with eight Sleds, to each two dogs, with goods and
Provisions to cross the Mountains, and three Horses to assist
us as far as the depth of the Snow will permit. We
River, the woods of Pine are stunted, full of branches to the
ground, and the Aspin, Willow c not much better: strange
to say, here is a strong belief that the haunt of the Mammoth,
is about this defile, I questioned several, none could positively
say, they had seen him, but their belief I found firm and not
to be shaken. I remarked to them, that such an enormous
heavy Animal must leave indelible marks of his feet, and his
feeding. This they all acknowledged, and that they had never
seen any marks of him, and therefore could show me none.
All I could say did not shake their behef in his existence.
January 6. We came to the last grass for the Horses
in Marshes and along small Ponds, where a herd of Bisons
had lately been feeding; and here we left the Horses poor
and tired, and notwithstanding the bitter cold, [they] lived
through the winter, yet they have only a clothing of close
hair, short and without any furr.
January y. Continuing our journey in the afternoon we
came on the track of a large animal, the snow about six inches
deep on the ice; I measured it; four large toes each of four
inches in length to each a short claw; the ball of the foot
sunk three inches lower than the toes, the hinder part of the
foot did not mark well, the length fourteen inches, by eight
inches in breadth, walking from north to south, and having
passed about six hours. We were in no humour to follow him:
the Men and Indians would have it to be a young mammoth
and I held it to be the track of a large old grizled Bear; yet
the shortness of the nails, the ball of the foot, and it's great
size was not that of a Bear, otherwise that of a very large old
Bear, his claws worn away; this the Indians would not allow.
Saw several tracks of Moose Deer. 9 pm Ther - 4.
January. A fine day. We are now following the
Brooks in the open defiles of the secondary Mountains; when
we can no longer follow it, the road is to cross a point of high
land, very
2 to 3000 feet above their base, with patches of dwarf pines,
and much snow; we marched ten miles today; and as we
advance we feel the mild weather from the Pacific Ocean.
This morning at 7 am Ther +6 at 9 pm +22. One of my
men named Du Nord beat a dog to death, he is what we
call a flash man, a showy fellow before the women but
a coward in heart, and would willingly desert if he had courage
to go alone; very glutinous and requires full ten pounds of
meat each day. And as I am constantly ahead cannot
prevent his dog flogging and beating: We saw no tracks of
Animals.
January 9th. Ther +32. SE wind and snowed all day
which made hauling very bad. We could proceed only about
four miles, this partly up a brook and then over a steep high
point with dwarf pines. We had to take only half a load and
return for the rest. The snow is full seven feet deep, tho'
firm and wet, yet the Dogs often sunk in it, but our snow
shoes did not sink more than three inches; and the weather
so mild that the snow is dropping from the trees, and everything
wet; here the Men finished the last of the fresh and
half dried Meat, which I find to be eight pounds for each
man p day. Ther +22.
January; Ther +16. A day of Snow and southerly
Gale of wind, the afternoon fine, the view now before us was
an ascent of deep snow, in all appearance to the height of
land between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, it was to me
a most exhilarating sight, but to my uneducated men a
dreadful sight, they had no scientific object in view, their
feelings were of the place they were; our guide Thomas
told us, that although we could barely find wood to make a
fire, we must now provide wood to pass the following night
on the height of the defile we were in, and which we had
to follow; my men were the most hardy that could be picked
out of a hundred brave hardy Men, but the scene of desolation
before us was dreadful, and I knew it, a heavy gale of wind
much more a mountain storm would have buried us beneath
it, but thank God the weather was fine, we had to cut wood
such as it was, and each took a Httle on his sled, yet such
was the despondency of the Men, aided by the coward Du
Nord, sitting down at every half mile, that when night came,
we had only wood to make a bottom, and on this to lay
wherewith to make a small fire, which soon burnt out and in
this exposed situation we passed the rest of a long night
without fire, and part of my men had strong feelings of personal
insecurity, on our right about one third of a mile from
us lay an enormous Glacier, the eastern face of which quite
steep, of about two thousand feet in height, was of a clean
fine green color, which I much admired but whatever was
the appearance, my opinion was, that the whole was not
solid ice, but formed on rocks from rills of water frozen in
their course; westward of this steep face, we could see the
glacier with it's fine green color and it's patches of snow in
a gentle slope for about two miles; eastward of this glacier
and near to us, was a high steep wall of rock, at the foot of
this, with a fine south exposure had grown a Httle Forest of
Pines of about five hundred yards in length by one hundred
in breadth, by some avalanche they had all been cut clean off
as with a scythe, not one of these trees appeared an inch
higher than the others. My men were not at their ease, yet
when night came they admired the briUiancy of the Stars,
and as one of them said, he thought he could almost touch
them with his hand: as usual, when the fire was made I set
off to examine the country before us, and found we had now
to descend the west side of the Mountains; I returned and
found part of my Men with a Pole of twenty feet in length
boring the Snow to find the bottom; I told them while we
had good Snow Shoes it was no matter to us whether the
Snow was ten or one hundred feet deep. On looking into the
hole they hit descended the color became more deep, and at the
lowest point was of a blue, almost black. The altitude of
this place above the level of the Ocean, by the point of boiling
water is computed to be eleven thousand feet (Sir George
Simpson). Many reflections came on my mind; a new world
was in a manner before me, and my object was to be at the
Pacific Ocean before the month of August, how were we to
find Provisions, and how many Men would remain with me,
for they were dispirited, amidst various thoughts I fell asleep
on my bed of Snow.
Early next morning we began our descent, here we soon
found ourselves not only with a change of climate, but more
so of Forest Trees, we had not gone half a mile before we
came to fine tall clean grown Pines of eighteen feet girth.
The descent was so steep that the Dogs could not guide the
Sleds, and often came across the Trees with some force, the
Dogs on one side and the Sled on the other, which gave us
some trouble to disentangle them; after a hurried day's
march down the mountain we came, on a Brook and camped
on the Snow, it being too deep to clear away.
January 1st. The weather bad, though mild, we continued
our descent, but steep only in two places, and at length came
on a tolerable level country; and camped at the junction of
two brooks; here Thomas came to us, he had, thank Heaven,
killed two Buck Moose Deer, very much wanted; I gave the
Men some Pemmecan for supper, and limited the quantity,
part of them grumbled, although they are sure that early
the morrow they will have two large deer to eat; in the last
thirty six hours they have devoured fifty six pounds of
pemmecan, being one fourth of all we have: we have
bring forward the Goods left on the Way; which they brought
except five pounds of Ball, which being in a leather bag was
carried away by a Wolverene.
Thus we continued day after day to march a few miles, as
the Snow was too wet and too deep to allow the dogs to make
any progress; on the 26th we put up on the banks of the
Columbia River, my Men had become so disheartened, sitting
down every half mile, and perfectly lost at all they saw around
them so utterly different from the east side of the Mountains,
four of them deserted to return back; and I was not
sorry to be rid of them, as for more than a month past they
had been very useless, in short they became an incumbrance
on me, and the other men were equally so to be rid of them;
having now taken up my residence for the rest of the winter
I may make my remarks on the countries and the climates
we have passed.
On the east side the snow is light and about two feet in
depth: on the west side which is open to the winds from the
Pacific Ocean and the distance short the snow loads the Mountains
and the low lands northward of about 150 miles below
the head o
The east side of the Mountains is formed of long slopes,
very few in this defile that are steep; but the west side is
more abrupt, and has many places that require steady sure
footed Horses, to descend it's banks in the open season: one
is tempted to enquire what may be the volume of water
contained in the immense quantities of snow brought to, and
lodged on, the Mountains, from the Pacific Ocean, and how
from an Ocean of salt water the immense evaporation constantly
going on is pure fresh water; these are mysterious
operations on a scale so vast that the human mind is lost in
the contemplation.